DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS OF
MAN AND OF CITIZENS
By the National Assembly of France
‘THE Representatives of the people of France, formed into a
National Assembly, considering that ignorance, neglect, or contempt of human rights, are the sole causes of public misfortunes and corruptions of Government, have resolved to set
forth, in a solemn declaration, these natural, imprescriptible,
and unalienable rights: that this declaration being constantly
present to the minds of the members of the body social, they
may be ever kept attentive to their rights and their duties:
that the acts of the legislative and executive powers of Government, being capable of being every moment compared
with the end of political institutions, may be more respected: and also, that the future claims of the citizens, being
directed by simple and incontestible principles, may always
tend to the maintenance of the Constitution, and the general
happiness.
‘For these reasons, the National Assembly doth recognize and
declare, in the presence of the Supreme Being, and with the
hope of his blessing and favour, the following sacred rights of
men and of citizens:
I. Men are born, and always continue, free, and equal in respect
of their rights. Civil distinctions, therefore, can be founded only
on public utility.
II. The end of all political associations, is, the preservation of the
natural and imprescriptible rights of man; and these rights are
liberty, property, security, and resistance of oppression.
12
The French Revolution
III. The nation is essentially the source of all sovereignty; nor can
any individual, or any body of men, be entitled to any authority
which is not expressly derived from it.
IV. Political Liberty consists in the power of doing whatever
does not injure another. The exercise of the natural rights of
every man, has no other limits than those which are necessary to secure to every other man the free exercise of the
same rights; and these limits are determinable only by the
law.
V. The law ought to prohibit only actions hurtful to society.
What is not prohibited by the law, should not be hindered; nor
should any one be compelled to that which the law does not
require.
VI. The law is an expression of the will of the community.
All citizens have a right to concur, either personally, or by
their representatives, in its formation. It should be the same
to all, whether it protects or punishes; and all being equal in
its sight, are equally eligible to all honours, places, and
employments, according to their different abilities, without
any other distinction than that created by their virtues and
talents.
VII. No man should be accused, arrested, or held in confinement, except in cases determined by the law, and according
to the forms which it has prescribed. All who promote, solicit,
execute, or cause to be executed, arbitrary orders, ought to
be punished; and every citizen called upon, or apprehended
by virtue of the law, ought immediately to obey, and renders
himself culpable by resistance.
13
Echoes
VIII. The law ought to impose no other penalties but such as are
absolutely and evidently necessary: and no one ought to be
punished, but in virtue of a law promulgated before the
offence, and legally applied.
IX. Every man being presumed innocent till he has been
convicted, whenever his detention becomes indispensible, all
rigour to him, more than is necessary to secure his person,
ought to be provided against by the law.
X. No man ought to be molested on account of his opinions, not
even on account of his religious opinions, provided his avowal
of them does not disturb the public order established by the
law.
XI. The unrestrained communication of thoughts and opinions
being one of the most precious rights of man, every citizen may
speak, write, and publish freely, provided he is responsible for
the abuse of this liberty in cases determined by law.
XII. A public force being necessary to give security to the rights
of men and of citizens, that force is instituted for the benefit of
the community, and not for the particular benefit of the persons with whom it is entrusted.
XIII. A common contribution being necessary for the support of
the public force, and for defraying the other expences of government, it ought to be divided equally among the members of
the community, according to their abilities.
XIV. Every citizen has a right, either by himself or his representative, to a free voice in determining the necessity of public
14
The French Revolution
